We've seen a preview of how
Pandas handles missing values
using the None Type and the
NumPy and NaN keywords.
Missing values are pretty common
in data cleaning activities,
and missing values can be there
for any number of reasons,
and I just want to touch
on a few of those here.
For instance, if you're
running a survey and
a respondent didn't
answer a question,
the missing value is
actually an omission.
This kind of
missing data is called
missing at random if there are
other variables that
might be used to
predict the variable
which is missing.
In my work when I deliver
surveys I often find that
missing data say interest
in being involved in
a follow-up study,
often has some correlation with
other data like
gender or ethnicity.
If there's no relationship
to other variables,
then we call this data
missing completely at random.
So these are just two examples of
missing data and
there's many more.
For instance, data might be
missing because it
wasn't collected.
Either because the process
responsible for
collecting the data
such as the researcher,
or because it wouldn't make sense
if it were to be collected.
This last example is extremely
common when you start
joining DataFrames
together from multiple sources
such as joining a list of
people at a university with
a list of offices
in the university.
Students don't generally have
offices but they're still
people at the university.
So let's take a look
at some ways of
handling missing data in Pandas.
So let's import Pandas,
import pandas as pd.
So Pandas is pretty good at
detecting missing values
directly from underlying
data formats like CSV files.
Although most missing
values are often
formatted as NaN, NULL,
None, or N/A,
sometimes missing values
are not labeled so clearly.
For example, I've worked with
social scientists who
regularly use the value of
99 in binary categories
to indicate that it's
a missing value.
The Pandas read csv function
has a parameter called
na_values that allows us to
specify the format
of missing values.
It allows scalar string lists
or dictionaries to be used.
So let's load a piece of data
from a file called log.csv.
So df equals pd.read csv
and we'll say datasets,
actually will use
class grades.csv.
If we do df.head
and we pass in 10,
we can see the top 10 rows.
So we can actually use the
functions .isnull to
create a Boolean mask
of the whole DataFrame.
This effectively broadcasts
the isnull function
to every cell of data.
So we'll say mask
equals df.isnull,
remember this is now just that
isnull function has been
broadcast across
that whole dataframe,
and what we've gotten mask
is something that size and
shape of the DataFrame
but it's a Boolean mask,
and we can take a look
at the head of that.
So this can be useful
for processing
rows based on certain
columns of data.
Another useful operation
is to be able to drop
all of those rows which
have any missing data,
which can be done with
the dropna function.
So we can say df.dropna.head.
So note how the rows
index with 2,
3, 7, 1,1 are all gone now.
One of the handy functions
that Pandas has for working with
missing values is the filling
function called fillna.
This function takes
a number of parameters.
You can pass in a single value
which is called a scalar
value to change all of
the missing data to one value.
This isn't really
applicable in this case,
but it's a pretty
common use case.
So if we wanted to fill in
all missing values with
zero we could use fillna.
So we just say df.fillna,
we pass in a zero,
here I'll just change
the DataFrame in place.
Remember most
DataFrame operations
returned copies of DataFrames.
So if you want to
do it in place you
often have to use the
in-place parameter,
and then let's take a look
at the head of that.
So note that the in-place
attribute causes Pandas to fill
those values in line and it does
not return a copy
of the DataFrame,
but instead modifies
the DataFrame that you have.
We can also use
the na filter option
to turn off whitespace filtering.
If whitespace is an actual
value of interest,
but in practice this
is pretty rare.
In data without any
na's passing na filter
equals false can improve
the performance of
reading a large file.
In addition to rules controlling
how missing values
might be loaded,
it's sometimes useful to consider
missing values as actually
having information.
I'll give an example
from my own research.
I often deal with logs from
online learning systems.
I've looked at video use in
lecture capture systems.
In these systems, it's
common for the player
to have a heartbeat
functionality,
where playbacks
statistics are sent
to the server every so often,
maybe every 30 seconds.
These heartbeats can
get big as they carry
the whole state of
the playback system.
Such as where the video
play head is at,
to where the video sizes at.
Where the video is being
rendered to the screen.
How loud the volume is and so on.
So if we load the data file
log.csv we can see
an example of this.
So df equals pd.read_csv,
will bring in log.csv and
we'll take a look at the head.
So in this data
the first column is
a timestamp in
the Unix epoch format.
The next column is
the username followed by
a webpage they're visiting
and the video that
they're playing.
Each row of the DataFrame
has a playback position.
We can see that as
the playback position
increases by one,
the timestamp increases
by about 30 seconds,
except for user Bob .
It turns out that Bob
has paused his playback,
so as time increases
the playback position
doesn't change.
Note too how difficult
it is for us to
try and derive this
knowledge from the data,
because it's not sorted by
timestamp as one might expect.
This is actually not uncommon on
systems which have
a high degree of parallelism.
There are a lot of
missing values in
the paused and volume columns.
It's not efficient to send
this information across
the network if it hasn't change,
so implementations rarely do.
So this particular
system just inserts
null values into the database
if there's no changes.
So next up is
the method parameter.
The two common fill values
are ffill and bfill.
Ffill is for forward
filling and it updates
an na value for
a particular cell with the
value from the previous row.
bfills for backward filling
which is the opposite
of ffill.
It fills the missing values
with the next valid value.
It's important to note
that your data needs to be
sorted in order for this to
have the effect you might want.
Data which comes from
traditional database
management systems
usually has no order guarantee
just like this data,
so you have to be careful.
So in Pandas we can sort
by index or by value.
Here will just promote
the timestamp to
an index and then
sort on the index.
So I'm going to say df
equals df.set index,
and I want the timestamp,
and then df.sort index and
let's take the head of that.
So now we have sorted
timestamp data.
If we look closely at
the output though we'll
notice that the index
isn't really unique.
Two users seemed to be able to
use the system at the same time,
and again this is
actually a common case.
So let's reset the index and use
some multi-level indexing
on time and user together,
and promote the username to
a second level index to
deal with the issue.
So I'll just reset
the index of the DataFrame,
and then we'll say df.set
index and we pass in
a list and we want time to be
the top level and then user,
and let's take a look
at that DataFrame.
Now that we have the Data indexed
and sorted appropriately
we can fill the missing
datas using ffill.
It's good to remember
when dealing
with missing values
so that you can deal
with individual
columns or sets of
columns by projecting them.
So you don't have to fix all
missing values in one command.
So df equals df.fillna
and we want to set the method
is equal to ffill.
So we can also do
customize fill-in
to replace values with
the replace function.
It allows replacement
from several approaches.
Value-to-value, list,
dictionary, regex.
So let's generate
a simple example.
So I'm going to create
a DataFrame here,
let say we want column A
to have these values 1,
1, 2, 3, 4.
B we'll say 3, 6, 3,
8, 9, and C
we'll just make a bunch
of different characters.
We can replace one's with 100,
so let's try the
value-to-value approach.
So we just say df.replace.
We give it the first value,
thing we want to replace
and what we want to
replace it with, so 100.
So about changing two values,
so let's try the list approach.
For example, we want
to change 1's
to 100 and 3's to 300.
So we could just do df.replace
and pass in two lists;
1 and 3 and then 100 and 300.
So what's really cool about
Pandas replacement is that
it supports regex too.
So let's look at our dataset
again from the logs.csv.
So pd.read csv will bring
in logs.csv and take
a look at this again.
So to replace using regex,
we make the first
parameter to replace
the regex pattern that
we want to replace.
The second parameter the value
that we want to
emit upon a match.
Then we pass in a third parameter
that just says regex equals true.
So take a moment to pause
this video and think
about this problem.
Imagine that we want to detect
all HTML pages in
the video column.
Let's say that this just means
that they ended with .HTML,
and we want to overwrite that
with the keyword webpage.
How could we accomplish that?
So here's my solution.
First, matching any number of
characters then ending in .HTML.
So I'll do df.replace.
I say to_replace,
so I'm going to put
in here that pattern,
any number of characters
so .star, .HTML,
and then I don't want to get out
things that have dot
HTML in the middle,
so I'll anchor this to the end.
The new value I want
is called webpage,
so value is webpage and
just regex equals true.
We see that that does
the trick there.
So one last note
on missing values.
When you use statistical
functions on DataFrames,
these functions typically
ignore missing values.
For instance, if you
try and calculate
the mean value of a DataFrame
the underlying NumPy functions
may ignore those missing values.
This is usually what you want,
but you should be aware of
the values that are
being excluded.
Why you have missing
values really
matters depending on the problem
you're trying to solve.
It might be unreasonable to
infer missing values
for instance,
if the Data shouldn't
exist in the first place.